---
title: H(n)MI
page_type: course
track: Exploration
course_type: Workshop
feature_img: /assets/images/2024-25/year-1/t-2/hnmi.png
img_caption:
faculty:
    - citlali-hernandez
    - lina-bautista
ects: 2
---


{{ insert_banner() }}

## Syllabus

The human body is both the source and the expression of emotions. In today’s digital era, where virtual environments mediate social interactions, the body finds new ways to be present, leading to a shift in how emotions are communicated. From an interdisciplinary approach, this workshop explores concepts related to affective computing, embodiment, creative coding and prototyping. Participants will use their bodies to sense and capture its behaviors, and will create prototypes to record this data. They will learn to build DIY wearable sensors to track bodily behaviors and explore ways to transform this information into visual or sound representations. The workshop proposes to introduce embodied interaction as a framework to explore how the experiences of the body can play a significant role in the way we conceptualize and engage with technology.


**Keywords: Embodiment, Biometrics, Sensing, data drawing, Sound, Electronics, Prototyping, Interaction**


## Schedule

### Week 1: Embodied Interaction.

During this week, students will explore the possibilities of gathering data from the body to create a record/register by visualizing and sonifying the results. The sessions will progress using Arduino and sensors to detect actions, p5.js to use the camera, sound and the creation of geometries, and ml.js to be able to use machine learning to gather data. At the end of the week students will have the task to develop a prototype based on the given exercises.

**Tue 11/02 - 16:00 to 19:00 Hrs. Citlali Hernández**
*Embodied Interaction*

- The body as an interface in design and artistic practices.
- Fabricating Sensors for the body
- Reading Sensors for the body 
- From physical to digital data drawings


**Thu 13/02 - 9:30 to 13:30 - Lina Bautista**
*Listening Data and data sonification*

- Parameters of sound as input data
- Sound identification and classification with machine learning
- Creating and manipulating sound

**Fri 14/02 - 9:30 to 13:30 - Citlali Hernández**
*Affective Computing*

- Using machine learning for emotion recognition.
- Drawing using time.
- Group tasks: Concept and prototype development (physical and digital).


### Week 2: Project development

During the second week of the workshop, students will focus on refining and developing the ideas generated by their groups, integrating the concepts of embodied interaction with the techniques explored in previous sessions. The main objective is to connect the tools and methods introduced in class to a collaborative group proposal. Each group will design, develop, and present a device (physical and digital) capable of capturing data from the body and translating it into a meaningful visualization.

**Thu 27/02 15:00 to 19:00 Hrs- Lina Bautista**
*Recap from the first week*

- Review of prototypes
- Project development. 


**Fri 28/02 - 9:00 to 16:00 - Citlali Hernández & Lina Bautista**
*Project development*

- Fine tuning of physical and coding aspects.
- Presentation preparation. 
- FINAL PRESENTATION (14:30 to 16:00)



## Materials

All materials needed for the course will be provided by the faculty. The students are required to bring to the classes their own students toolkit and the programming boards given to them at the start of the academic year, other development boards, sensors and actuators will be provided during the classes. Bring in your laptop with the proper software installed prior to the class if required (emails will be sent prior to the classes regarding this aspect).



## Faculty

{{ insert_faculty() }}
