---
title: Expanding Frames
page_type: course
track: Reflection
course_type: Workshop
feature_img:
img_caption:
faculty:
ects: 1
---

{{ insert_banner() }}

## Syllabus

This week-long course invites participants to expand their perspectives on design practices by exploring how designers imagine emergent futures. The course is structured around two symposiums:

[Responsive Cities Symposium 2025](https://responsivecities.iaac.net/), a biennial international symposium on the future of cities.

Sensing and Sensation Symposium, a joint activity co-organized by MDEF and the [Transmedia Research Institute](https://www.transmediaresearch.institute/).

Through keynote lectures, panel discussions, workshops, and collaborative sessions, participants will critically engage with innovative approaches to design futures.

### Responsive Cities Symposium 2025
***Barcelona - 25th and 26th of February 2025***

The 2025 edition focuses on “Design Matter(s) for Decarbonization” and takes place within the framework of the [Circular Design](https://www.cid-innovationalliance.eu/) - CiD project, co-funded by the Erasmus+ Programme of the European Union and developed by the Institute for Advanced Architecture of Catalonia - IAAC- (Spain), Leibniz University Hannover LUH (Germany), University of Genoa (Italy), Tallinn Business Incubators (Estonia), Association ARCES Palermo (Italy), Ersilia Foundation (Spain), Architekturos Fondas (Lithuania), Materiom Ltd. (UK), National Research Council CNR (Italy), Architects’ Council of Europe ACE (Belgium), Association for Local Democracy ALDA (France), Associated Partner: Ellen MacArthur Foundation (Global network).

*Responsive Cities 2025* aims to shift the conversation on resource depletion by focusing on abundance rather than scarcity, advocating for material-driven innovations in architecture and urban design that challenge traditional material practice and advance decarbonization goals. Adopting an abundance mindset is a new paradigm relevant to design and construction practices, expanding the definition of “resources” and exploring where both raw and non-raw materials can be sourced and “mined” to offset carbon emissions.

*Design Matter(s) for Decarbonization* seeks to explore proposals for novel monitoring, design, and manufacturing processes that effectively detect and reconstitute materials while improving the performance of material assemblies to facilitate reuse. It also advocates for a vision of metabolic architecture: an architecture that digests its waste or decomposes itself; an architecture where its form adapts to material availability, introducing new aesthetics; an architecture that redefines building lifecycles and ultimately regenerates rather than merely reducing its negative environmental and economic footprint.

The *Responsive Cities Symposium - Design Matter(s) for Decarbonization* is organized around the following topics:

DESIGN & BUILD: design for disassembly | form follows availability | digital manufacturing for reuse | circular feedback

DECARBONIZE: zero & negative carbon materials | buildings & cities as carbon sinks | regeneration | sustainable land management

ADAPT TO CLIMATE & PERFORM: synthetic ecologies | living systems | building metabolism | design performance

DIGITIZE THE PHYSICAL: computing (living) matter | monitoring | digital twins | material passports

ETHICS & POLICIES: design ethics | inclusivity | decision making | democratize technologies

### Sensing and Sensation Symposium
***Barcelona - 27th and 28th of February 2025***

The *Sensing and Sensation Symposium* is co-organized by MDEF and the Transmedia Research Institute (TRX). 

Residents of the TRX *Sensing and Sensation Hybrid Semester* will travel to Barcelona to kick off their residency program.

During the Symposium MDEF01 and TRX students will explore together the concepts of affective computing, embodiment, creative coding and prototyping. Participants will use their bodies to sense and capture its behaviors, and will create prototypes to record this data.

The workshop is a continuation of the *H(n)MI* course of the MDEF program.

During the second week of the workshop, students will focus on refining and developing the ideas generated by their groups, integrating the concepts of embodied interaction with the techniques explored in previous sessions. The main objective is to connect the tools and methods introduced in class to a collaborative group proposal. Each group will design, develop, and present a device (physical and digital) capable of capturing data from the body and translating it into a meaningful visualization.

## Learning Objectives

- The primary goal of this course is to expand participants' understanding of innovative design practices and emergent themes by engaging with cutting-edge ideas, methodologies, and real-world applications presented by expert speakers. Participants will explore existing projects and conceptual frameworks that challenge traditional approaches to design, encouraging them to critically reflect on their own assumptions and practices.

- Through collaborative work with peers, participants will have the opportunity to synthesize insights from the symposiums into a common project, fostering interdisciplinary exchange, creativity, and the development of actionable design proposals. 

**Keywords: DesignFutures, SustainableDesign, CircularInnovation, EmbodiedInteraction, CollaborativePrototyping**

## Schedule

=== "25/02"

    **Responsive Cities Symposium**

=== "26/02"

    **Responsive Cities Symposium**

=== "27/02"

    **Sensing and Sensation Symposium - H(n)MI** 

=== "28/02"

    **Sensing and Sensation Symposium - H(n)MI**


## Grading Method

| Percentage  | Description                                  |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------         |
| 50%         | Attendance                                   |
| 50%         | Participation                                |



!!! ects "European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS)"

    {{ ects }} ECTS